# Running containers declaratively

## Introduction

So far we've been running docker commands declaratively at the command line, this is fine in a tutorial setting or simple demos however it doesn't really scale very well. To run a container we are typically running a docker build and then a docker run command. If we wanted to make this available to colleagues we could use script files to execute these commands sequentially but then we'd have to deal with different operating systems etc.

This is where Docker-compose can really help.

## Docker-compose single image

We can take the previous examples of running a simple web app and instead of executing docker commands imperatively we can use a docker-compose file.

>Note: docker-compose should be installed automatically as part of the docker for windows/mac tooling. You can confirm this by running `docker-compose` at the command line

Docker compose files are YAML files typically with an extension .yml

```yaml
version: '3'
services:
  hello-docker-web:
    image: "shahiddev/k8s:1.0"
    ports:
      - 8080:80
```

>Note: YAML files are case and whitespace sensitive. Incorrect indentation can be source of many hours of lost time :)

Create a docker-compose.yml file in a empty directory.

Navigate to that directory and run:

```txt
docker-compose up 
```

You should see something similar to this output:

```txt
>docker-compose up
Creating network "solutions_default" with the default driver
Creating solutions_hello-docker-web_1 ... done
Attaching to solutions_hello-docker-web_1
hello-docker-web_1  | warn: Microsoft.AspNetCore.DataProtection.KeyManagement.XmlKeyManager[35]
hello-docker-web_1  |       No XML encryptor configured. Key {3e989dcb-ec98-45af-aaab-ad9cfc93a3a1} may be persisted to storage in unencrypted form.
hello-docker-web_1  | Hosting environment: Production
hello-docker-web_1  | Content root path: /app
hello-docker-web_1  | Now listening on: http://[::]:80
hello-docker-web_1  | Application started. Press Ctrl+C to shut down.
```

>Note how docker compose is creating a network based on the name of the folder you're running in (in my case the folder was called "solutions")

You should be able to browse to localhost:8080 and see the same web application as we've seen in earlier exercises.

We can stop the application by typing:

```txt
docker-compose down
```

Tasks:

1. Run the application in the background
2. Change the localhost port number to 1234 and run the compose file again (tip: you can simply run docker-compose up again even if it's already running for the changes to be applied)

## Docker-compose with build

In the previous example we used an existing image, however its more likely we'll be using docker-compose with the source code of a container.
We can use a docker-compose file to build the containers first and then run them rather than pulling an existing image from the Docker hub. As we'll see in the next section you can do either or both when you have multiple containers in your compose file.

Create a new folder called dc and in there create a new aspnetcore web application. Ensure this application builds ok using dotnet build

```txt
mkdir dc
cd dc
dotnet new mvc --name web
cd web
dotnet build
```
Now add the Dockerfile to the web folder

```docker
FROM microsoft/dotnet:sdk AS build-env
WORKDIR /app

# Copy csproj and restore as distinct layers
COPY *.csproj ./
RUN dotnet restore

# Copy everything else and build
COPY . ./
RUN dotnet publish -c Release -o out

# Build runtime image
FROM microsoft/dotnet:aspnetcore-runtime
WORKDIR /app
COPY --from=build-env /app/out .
ENTRYPOINT ["dotnet", "web.dll"]
```

We can now change our docker-compose file to build the container image rather than using an existing one.

in the dc folder create a docker-compose.yml file and add the following:

```yaml
version: '3'
services:
  web:
    build: web/.
    ports:
      - 8080:80

```

Notice how we've changed the compose file from container to build and we're pointing to the location of the dockerfile

Now if we run docker-compose up with a build flag

```txt
docker-compose up --build
```

the --build flag tells docker-compose to build any containers that need to be built first.

We should see something similar to this

```txt
Building web
Step 1/10 : FROM microsoft/dotnet:sdk AS build-env
 ---> bbae085fa7eb
Step 2/10 : WORKDIR /app
 ---> Using cache
 ---> 702d93fad513
Step 3/10 : COPY *.csproj ./
 ---> Using cache
 ---> 730478ede917
Step 4/10 : RUN dotnet restore
 ---> Using cache
 ---> 35d0a3b67c5b
Step 5/10 : COPY . ./
 ---> f3e3fed6cfc6
Step 6/10 : RUN dotnet publish -c Release -o out
 ---> Running in 0ef2569d44da
Microsoft (R) Build Engine version 16.0.450+ga8dc7f1d34 for .NET Core
Copyright (C) Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

  Restore completed in 918.26 ms for /app/web.csproj.
  web -> /app/bin/Release/netcoreapp2.1/web.dll
  web -> /app/bin/Release/netcoreapp2.1/web.Views.dll
  web -> /app/out/
Removing intermediate container 0ef2569d44da
 ---> 4856286395f2
Step 7/10 : FROM microsoft/dotnet:aspnetcore-runtime
 ---> ee385332f978
Step 8/10 : WORKDIR /app
 ---> Using cache
 ---> 413282b0d218
Step 9/10 : COPY --from=build-env /app/out .
 ---> 2c478821448e
Step 10/10 : ENTRYPOINT ["dotnet", "web.dll"]
 ---> Running in 4e0c1cd25c86
Removing intermediate container 4e0c1cd25c86
 ---> beff29661ba1
Successfully built beff29661ba1
Successfully tagged dc_web:latest
Recreating dc_web_1 ... done
Attaching to dc_web_1
web_1  | Hosting environment: Production
web_1  | Content root path: /app
web_1  | Now listening on: http://[::]:80
web_1  | Application started. Press Ctrl+C to shut down.
```

Notice how the build happens first then the docker-compose kicks in as before.

Our app should now be available at the port specified in the compose file.

## Multiple images

Most applications are not simply comprised of a single container, especially in the world of microservices.
When we want to run multiple containers we can certainly run individual containers and connect them together, however in terms of an application you often want to treat a set of containers a group and spin/shutdown these containers together.

Docker compose allows you to define a set of containers and their relationship in a YAML file. When run the compose file all of the containers are created at the same time.


Let's take a look at an example Docker-compose file which has more than one container

To run this example we'll pull an example from git

```txt
mkdir compose-2
cd compose-2
git init
git pull https://github.com/shahiddev/docker-compose-example.git

```

> Hint: If you have trouble using git you can browse to the github repo and download the source code.

Take a look at the docker-compose file in this example.

Notice how we have two sections now (web and backend), both of these are using builds with individual dockerfiles to build their respective containers.
Note how the backend doesn't specify a ports section, this means the backend container isn't accessible however the front end is. However the frontend application will call the backend using the internal network that docker compose creates.

Let's run this compose file, from the folder containing the docker compose file

```txt
docker-compose up --build
```

This should output some build messages as each container is built but eventually it should show the compose happening which should look something like this:

```txt
Successfully built cb412c073b41
Successfully tagged dc_backend:latest
Recreating dc_web_1   ... done
Creating dc_backend_1 ... done
Attaching to dc_backend_1, dc_web_1
web_1      | Hosting environment: Production
web_1      | Content root path: /app
web_1      | Now listening on: http://[::]:80
web_1      | Application started. Press Ctrl+C to shut down.
backend_1  | warn: Microsoft.AspNetCore.DataProtection.KeyManagement.XmlKeyManager[35]
backend_1  |       No XML encryptor configured. Key {b37b1dbf-4323-4f05-87d8-2f6cdc5183b7} may be persisted to storage in unencrypted form.
backend_1  | Hosting environment: Production
backend_1  | Content root path: /app
backend_1  | Now listening on: http://[::]:80
backend_1  | Application started. Press Ctrl+C to shut down.
```

Docker compose outputs the console messages from each container and we can see the application is running.

Browse to localhost:8080 and you should see a message similar to this:

```txt
Hello from the front end and the backend said ["value1","value2"]
```

Stop the running applications by pressing Ctrl+c and now run compose up with -d flag

```txt
docker-compose up -d
```

>Note: If you don't change any of the source code in the two source folders you do not need to run `docker-compose up` with the `--build` flag.

We can see the running containers that compose is managing for us by running

```txt
docker ps
``

We should see something like this:

```txt
>docker ps
CONTAINER ID        IMAGE               COMMAND                CREATED             STATUS              PORTS                  NAMES
019ad52b88a1        dc_web              "dotnet web.dll"       8 minutes ago       Up 4 minutes        0.0.0.0:8080->80/tcp   dc_web_1
5f9362e9ccb3        dc_backend          "dotnet backend.dll"   8 minutes ago       Up 4 minutes                               dc_backend
```

We can teardown these containers (and the network) with:

```txt
docker-compose down
```

You run `docker ps` again to confirm both containers are no longer running.

Tasks

1. Examine the web component and note what address the api call is being sent to
2. (optional) Add a rabbitmq component to the application using the official rabbitmq image and extend the backend to send a message to rabbitmq
3. (optional)Explore using multiple compose-files per environment and overriding values (hint: look into docker-compose overrides)


## Takeaways

* Docker compose allows us to declaratively describe docker based application
* Compose can use existing images, build images based on source (with dockerfiles) or a combination of both
* Compose allows us to spin up containers as a group and manage their lifecycle
* Compose is an excellent way of using containers in dev to manage dependencies so new developers can just run docker compose without having to have various dependencies installed (e.g. backend devs don't need npm/yarn etc)