# Deployments and more

## Introduction

In the previous section we explored the basic CLI concepts, in this section we'll focus a little more on deployments and the related features/components

## Deployments

In the previous exercise we created a deployment using the `run` command.

Let's do that again

```txt
kubectl run hello-world --image=shahiddev/k8s:1.0 --port=80
```

(again you can ignore the warning about deprecated API - we are using API to simplify the setup of exercises)

We can edit that deployment using the edit command

```txt
kubectl edit deployment hello-world
```

This will pop open Notepad (on windows) and show you the definition of the deployment stored in Kubernetes in YAML format. The command line is blocked waiting for you to either make a change to the deployment or to close it without saving

If you close notepad without making any changes you should see

```txt
>kubectl edit deployment hello-world
Edit cancelled, no changes made.
```

Tasks

1. Edit the deployment and change the scale of the deployment. Confirm the deployment has scaled in the CLI
2. Edit the deployment to add a label to the deployment called *deployment* with value of "1" (quotes are important) and filter deployments based on this label in the CLI

### Generating manifest files

So far we've run imperative commands however should really use the manifest files in Kubernetes.

To generate the manifest file for a deployment we can use a shortcut (ensure you delete your existing hello-world deployment before continuing):

```txt
kubectl run hello-world --image=shahiddev/k8s:1.0 --port=80 --dry-run -o yaml > helloworld-deployment.yaml
```

The `--dry-run` flag tells Kubernetes to only validate the deployment request but not create it

`-o yaml > helloworld-deployment.yaml` outputs the result in yaml and pipes it to a file.

We can then deploy this manifest file using:

```txt
kubectl apply -f helloworld-deployment.yaml
```

the `-f` flag indicates you are using a file.

This should create a deployment although we may see an warning:

```txt
Warning: kubectl apply should be used on resource created by either kubectl create --save-config or kubectl apply
```

This is due to the presence of some empty fields in the deployment yaml, you would normally remove them before applying for now we can ignore the warning.

We can make changes to this deployment file and simply run the `kubectl apply` command again to update the deployment with the latest values.

Tasks

1. Open the yaml file in an editor (VS code ideally) and take a look at what's generated
2. Edit the yaml to change the scale and update the deployment.

## Expose services

So far we've deployed this web application but we've not yet connected to it in the browser.

To expose applications externally we need to create a service

We can do this imperative as before 

```txt
kubectl expose deployment hello-world --port=80 --type=LoadBalancer
```

This creates a service to allow external traffic to access the application pods. In docker-desktop this simply means the application will be accessible on localhost:80

On a cloud platform a `loadBalancer` service will request a public ip address and cloud load balancer from the cloud provider.

You can check the public ip address of the service by running

```txt
kubectl get svc
```

>When running in the Cloud it will take a few minutes for the LoadBalancer service to create a public IP address

There are many other components in Kubernetes that you may want to explore if time allows:


1. Explore ConfigMaps and how you can use these to pass configuration to your containers via environment variables. Start by getting configmaps from your cluster using `kubectl` and explore using commands such as `describe`
2. Secrets - Similar to config maps but used for sensitive information. Start by getting secrets from your cluster using `kubectl` and explore using commands such as `describe`
3. Volumes allow us to mount shared drives/disks to allow applications to write data which is persisted beyond the life of the container
