# Using AKS

## Setup the cluster

We will be using the Azure CLI to create/interact with AKS so we need to ensure we are setup correctly.

You can list the subscriptions you have access to using:

```txt
az account list -o table
```

Ensure the IsDefault is true for the account you want to use for this exercise

If you need to change the default you can do this with:

```txt
az account set -s <subscriptionId>
```

Create a resource group

```txt
az group create -n k8s-workshopRG -l northcentralus
```

We may need to register the container services resource provider

```txt
az provider register -n Microsoft.ContainerService
```

We can now create our cluster

```txt
az aks create -n k8s-workshop -g k8s-workshoprg -k 1.13.5
```

We are leaving most options default - only specifying the K8s version we want. This operation takes between 6-8 mins.

In the meantime open a new shell and explore the `az aks` commands to see how you would change the number nodes you create & vm types. Don't create a new cluster though

Once the cluster is created we need to gain access to the cluster we can use the `get-credentials` subcommand of the `az aks`

```txt
az aks get-credentials -n k8s-workshop -g k8s-workshoprg --generate-ssh
```

This will get the credentials for the cluster and create/merge a context in the kubeconfig file and set it as the active context

Running this command should display the context pointing to the cluster we've just provisioned.

```txt
kubectl config current-context
```

If you wanted to switch back to the docker cluster you can switch context

```txt
kubectl config use-context docker-for-desktop
```

Task

1. List the current contexts you have in your kubeconfig
2. (optional) Open the kubeconfig file (the file location was displayed when you merged the AKS credentials in a previous step) in an editor (but don't modify it!), can you understand it's structure?

## Deploying applications

You can follow the same imperative commands used in earlier exercises to deploy the same web application to AKS. However we want to promote good practices so you should deploy the application using the manifest file created in earlier exercises

Tasks

1. Explore the cluster and nodes on AKS and compare them to what you saw with docker-for-desktop
2. Deploy the hello-world application
3. Expose the hello-world application publicly using a service manifest file (create one if you don't already have one - hint --dry-run may help create it). Watch the service resource to see when it has a public IP address.
4. Manually scale the application and note where pods are created (hint you can use `kubectl get pods -o wide` to show you the node names where pods are running)
5. Scale down the application - which pods are removed?
6. Add a liveness probe to the deployment manifest file (hint: the shahiddev/k8s image has a http health endpoint at /home/health) use the `localhost/home/setunhealthy` address to test your application container is restarted.
7. Perform a rolling update to v2 image (hint: you may want to add a rolling up strategy to the deployment yaml)