# Using helm (v2)

This exercise will setup Helm v2 into your cluster and then create a helm chart based on the sample hello-world application.

## Install and set up Helm

Ensure you have Helm installed, you can see instructions for installing here: https://helm.sh/docs/using_helm/#installing-helm
If you're on Windows then Chocolatey is the easiest way of achieving this, if you already have chocolatey installed you can simply type `choco install kubernetes-helm`

Helm runs a component in the cluster called Tiller - this component needs to have permissions to run (as admin!) so we first need to create the service account and the cluster role binding (the cluster admin role already exists).

Copy the text below and save it in a file called `helm-rbac.yaml`

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: ServiceAccount
metadata:
  name: tiller
  namespace: kube-system
---
kind: ClusterRoleBinding
apiVersion: rbac.authorization.k8s.io/v1beta1
metadata:
  name: tiller-clusterrolebinding
subjects:
- kind: ServiceAccount
  name: tiller
  namespace: kube-system
roleRef:
  kind: ClusterRole
  name: cluster-admin
  apiGroup: ""
```

Apply this manifest file and ensure the service account and cluster role binding are created successfully.

We now need to initialise the tiller component and ensure it uses the service account we've just created.

At the terminal run

```txt
helm init --service-account tiller
```

Helm is now setup and ready to use.

**Please remember this is not a production ready scenario due to the tiller security considerations but it is sufficient to demonstrate the concepts**

## Create a new helm chart

From the terminal run

```cmd
helm create hello-world
```

This creates a blank Helm chart in a sub-folder.

Explore this helm chart - notice the templating (Go templates) used to substitute values.

### Tasks

Amend the Values.yaml file to use the `shahiddev/k8s:1.0` image and to create a LoadBalancer service listening on port 80. 


## Deploying the helm chart

Once you've created your helm chart you can deploy it

```cmd
helm install --name hello-world --set rbac.create=true  .\hello-world
```
