# Mounting Azure storage

This exercise walks you through a simple example of using Azure files storage for a pod.
You need to use a cluster in Azure for this example.


## Deploying the "infrastructure"

In order for Kubernetes to "talk" to Azure and provision resources we need to deploy some drivers and persistentvolumeclaims (pvc). The storage class specifies details of the underlying storage backend (e.g. performance tier).

 This example is uses dynamic provisioning, where the azure storage is dynamically provisioned when required, other options allow you to pre-provision the storage account and then this pre-provisioned resource can be used by pods.

### Steps

Create a new folder and copy the yaml files from 
https://github.com/shahiddev/docker-k8s-workshop/tree/master/Kubernetes/solutions/volumes into that folder.

Open the `azure-files-setup.yaml` in VS Code (or your editor of choice)
This file contains a number of Kubernetes resources which are being created
- A storageclass
- A persistentvolumeclaim
- RBAC configuration

Take a moment to look at these resources - see if they make sense

(note: you can put multiple resources into a single yaml file if you separate them with `---`)

Deploy the `azure-files-setup.yaml` file by executing:

```cmd
kubectl apply -f azure-files-setup.yaml
```

At this point we are ready to start using Azure Files storage in our pods.

## Deploying a pod to use the storage

We can now deploy a pod which is going to mount the Azure Files and will allow us to save files to Azure Files.
Before we do that, take a moment to look at the `azure-pvc-pod.yaml` in particular the volume mount section, does it make sense?

Tasks:

1. Deploy the `azure-pvc-pod.yaml` which uses the uses the volume created above.
2. Shell into the running pod (hint: the command to do this is similar to the docker equivalent) and find the folder that is mapped to the Azure files storage. Create a new file in this folder (hint: in Linux you can type `touch <filename>` to quickly create an empty file with the given name)
3. Browse the Azure portal  and find the storage account which has been dynamically provisioned for you (this will be in the MC_xxx folder), confirm the file you created in the pod is visible there.
4. Create a second pod which is also using the same volume ` azure-pvc-pod2.yaml` and confirm you can see the same file in this pod too.

## Wrap up

You can use Azure storage to store files that are created in pods running in Kubernetes. 
We've only scratched the surface of various storage options. 
There are a variety of storage backends supported in Kubernetes along with many different storage types (e.g. blob storage, block storage etc).


