# Helm

Please ensure you have Helm (v3) installed for this exercise.

### Installing Helm

Windows users with chocolatey installed:

```cmd
choco install kubernetes-helm
```

Otherwise see [installation instructions](https://helm.sh/docs/intro/install/)

To verify you have Helm correctly installed try running `helm version` and you should see something like this (the specific version numbers may be different but it should say v3)

```cmd
version.BuildInfo{Version:"v3.1.1", GitCommit:"afe70585407b420d0097d07b21c47dc511525ac8", GitTreeState:"clean", GoVersion:"go1.13.8"}
```

### Add stable chart repository

Helm charts are stored in repositories much like Docker images are.

Common/popular packages are added to a "default" repository (again like DockerHub) called "stable"

```cmd
 helm repo add stable https://kubernetes-charts.storage.googleapis.com/
```

Once added we want to ensure we have the latest version so we can update the repo(s)

```cmd
helm repo update
```

### Searching for Charts

We can list the charts available from a chart repository by running

```cmd
helm search repo stable
```

This should give you a long list of available charts we can install.

### Install a chart

Ensure you Kubernetes context is pointing to the cluster you want to use, if not use

```cmd
kubectl config use-context <contextname>
```

Install the redis chart by running

```cmd
helm install myredis stable/redis
```

Notice the text that's output - you can ignore the deprecation warning for the purposes of this workshop. The chart includes instructions on how to access the redis cluster that's created. Note: for Windows users most of the commands in the instructions won't work without some modification (they are bash commands).

Take a look at the resources being created by the chart `kubectl get pods` you should see something like this initially:

```cmd
NAME               READY   STATUS              RESTARTS   AGE
myredis-master-0   0/1     ContainerCreating   0          39s
myredis-slave-0    0/1     ContainerCreating   0          39s
```

We can see that we're creating a Redis cluster with a master and slave nodes

When the deployment completes (may take a few mins depending on your cluster), you should see something like this when you run `kubectl get pods`

```txt
NAME               READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
myredis-master-0   1/1     Running   0          6m24s
myredis-slave-0    1/1     Running   0          6m24s
myredis-slave-1    1/1     Running   0          3m26s
```

You've just deployed a Redis cluster with a master and 2 slave nodes, imagine how long that would have taken to create in your current infrastructure!

We can see what we have deployed with Helm by running `helm ls`

If there was a new version of the chart available you could upgrade using Helm.

If time allows you can try the following tasks, otherwise move onto Clean up section

### Tasks

1. (optional) See if you can connect to the cluster using the information that was output when the helm chart was installed (hopefully still visible in your terminal)

### Clean up

If you're not performing the optional task below you can delete the Redis cluster by running

```cmd
helm uninstall myredis
```

Confirm resources are being deleted by running `kubectl get pods`
